22 November 2012Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on the 21st November 2012.Cabinet approved the Electricity Distribution Asset Management Turnaround Programme and the commencement of the first phase of this programme. This includes development of a business plan for the project; standardised refurbishment, maintenance and process recommendations. The programme will address the aging electricity infrastructure which forms the basis for the distribution of electricity to business and the households.The programme will be implemented within the approved governance structure and monitored by the Presidential Infrastructure Co-ordinating Council (PICC) under the Strategic Infrastructure Project Six (SIP 6). Eskom will be the lead entity that procures on behalf of municipalities. This will ensure the economies of scale in the implementation of this programme.Cabinet approved the release of the draft country report on the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities for public comment. South Africa is a signatory to the United Nations Conventions on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Member countries are expected to submit progress reports on the implementation of the rights of the persons with disabilities.The report will be made available through the Government websites as well as from the organisations of persons with disabilities.Cabinet received the report from the National Disaster Management Centre (NDMC) noted an increase in the number of disaster incidences across the country in the past financial year. Cabinet endorsed the building of capacity in Provinces and in Municipalities so as to further enhance the capacity of the provinces and municipality to respond quicker and appropriately whenever such disasters occur.Cabinet noted progress on the implementation of the first National Evaluation Plan for 2012/13 and the establishment of the National Evaluation System. Cabinet approved the second National Evaluation Plan which covers 16 priority evaluations for 2013/14 and a total of 8 provisional evaluations for 2014/15 and 2015/16.The National Evaluation Policy Framework focusses on national and provincial evaluation plans, to ensure that strategic government programmes are evaluated which should improve government s performance.Cabinet approved the 2010 FIFA World Cup Country Report for circulation to all relevant stakeholders. This close out report accounts for all the financial resources that were allocated for the implementation of the 17 Government guarantees given to FIFA. This report will also serve as a reference guide and benchmark for planning other major sporting events. Cabinet welcomed the temporary return to work by the striking farm workers in the Western Cape whilst all parties are finding a solution to the dispute. Cabinet calls on all the parties to support these discussions which are currently facilitated by the Department of Labour.Cabinet noted the situation taking place in Lenasia, Gauteng. It has mandated the Minister of Human Settlements, to urgently interact with the Gauteng Provincial Government to find an amicable solution to address this situation. Cabinet expressed sadness at the fresh outbreak of violence in Palestine. Cabinet condemns in the strongest term the disproportionate use of force by the Israel government, which has resulted in a significant number of deaths and injuries particularly among the Palestinian civilians including children.Cabinet has noted with concern, the violence that has escalated in the Democratic Republic Congo (DRC). This flaring violence has resulted in a significant number of deaths and injuries and the displacement of many people, including children.South Africa remains committed in ensuring that Africa achieves peace and stability. Africa has shown great potential for economic growth and development. Cabinet calls on the international community to support the peace initiatives that will result in the lasting stability in the region.The unveiling of Steve Biko Heritage Centre will take place on the 30 November 2012, in Ginsberg,King William s Town in the Eastern Cape. The Centre is part of government s programme to promote an inclusive heritage, reconciliation and nation building. The Centre will serve as an intellectual resource, while providing an economic opportunity for the region.Cabinet noted President Jacob Zuma will be embarking on his 9th Siyahlola visit since the beginning of this year at the Mbombela Municipality in Mpumalanga on 4 December 2012.Government is humbled by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, World AIDS Day Report released on 20 November 2012. The report demonstrates South Africa s commitment to the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS. According to the report, South Africa increased its scale of HIV treatment by 75%, ensuring 1.7 million people had access to the lifesaving treatment. The report confirms the increased and sustained investments by government and its agencies on HIV treatment, such as antiretroviral therapy, which have led to many lives being saved in the past six years. South Africa remains committed to the fight against new HIV infections, and will continue to invest on the sustainable HIV treatment and prevention programmes including the prevention of mother to child transmission.Cabinet appointmentsCabinet approved the following appointments:Enquiries: Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson) Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)