1 June 2012Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 30 May 2012.1.1 Executive Public Participation Programme Cabinet noted that on Saturday, 2 June 2012, President Jacob Zuma will conduct an infrastructure service delivery monitoring visit to Ngobi Moretele local municipality under the Bojanala Platinum District. The visit will illustrate progress on commitments made during the 2012 State of Nation Address. 1.2 Mobilisation during JunePresident Jacob Zuma will officiate the Youth Day celebrations in the Eastern Cape on 16 June 2012, at the Wolfson, KwaZakhele Stadium in Port Elizabeth under the theme: Together We Can Do More to Build Infrastructure and Fight Youth Unemployment, Poverty and Inequality . June will also see celebrations around Environment Month under the theme: Green Economy: Does It Include You? The Department of Environmental Affairs will prominently communicate interventions which will ensure that youth are part of the green economy.Cabinet also noted that on 12 June the International Labour Organization (ILO) will observe the 10th World Day Against Child Labour. Cabinet calls on all sectors of society to partner with government and Play Your Part in removing this scourge which robs our young leaders of their rights. 1.3 Human Dignity Cabinet expressed its disapproval of the Brett Murray portrait that depicted the President in a denigrating manner. This depiction also showed disrespect for the office of the President and his culture that he shares with millions of people. Whereas government is a proponent of freedom of expression but Cabinet is of the firm view that this freedom should be exercised with responsibility and sensitivity and should not undermine the fundamental right to human dignity of the President and/or any citizen of this country. 1.4 Condolences Cabinet expresses its condolences to the families and friends of the two South Africans who were killed in a fire on Monday, 28 May 2012 at Villaggio Mall in Doha, Qatar. Government also extends its sympathies to the government and people of Qatar, who lost loved ones in the devastating fire.1.5 The Square Kilometre Array (SKA)The much-anticipated decision by the SKA Organisation to build the majority of the SKA in Africa has been welcomed. Cabinet congratulated the Inter-Ministerial Committee on the SKA and the SKA Project team, and extended appreciation to all South Africa s partner countries Ghana, Botswana, Kenya, Namibia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Zambia and Mozambique - for their continued support. 1.6 International Agenda The International Africa ICT (Information Communication Technology) INDABA, which is endorsed by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), will take place in Cape Town from 4 to 7 June 2012. This Indaba seeks to amongst others:Cabinet urges participants of the ICT INDABA to endeavour to set up a continental agenda and policy aimed at expanding the growth of the ICT sector. Cabinet commended the organisers for the successful hosting of the Global African Diaspora Summit. The productive and meaningful deliberations culminated in a Declaration which outlines a Programme of Action comprising key areas in political, economic and social cooperation. Cooperation in these areas will enable implementation of the Programme of Action following the Summit. 1.7 Sport and Recreation The Springbok rugby team will play three Test matches against England between the 9 and 23 June. Cabinet wishes the national team well and calls on all South Africans to support the Springboks and to welcome the English team with a warm African spirit. 1.8 Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting on Higher Education Cabinet noted that a two-day Extraordinary SADC Ministerial Meeting on Higher Education will be held in Johannesburg on 4 and 5 June 2012 to formulate a clear policy vision for higher education. 1.9 Agreement between South Africa and CubaCabinet noted the agreement signed last week between the South African and Cuban Ministers of Health. This agreement will enable South Africa to use the capacity that Cuba has in the training of medical doctors. Through this new agreement we will now be able to increase the number of students who will be deployed to Cuba for medical training.2.1 Progress on the Gauteng Freeway Improvement ProjectCabinet noted that the Deputy President will give a full media briefing on progress on the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project. 2.2 The completion of the ratification process establishing the Collaborative Africa Budget Reform initiative (CABRI) as an international organisation and the hosting of the CABRI secretariat by the government of South AfricaCabinet noted recent developments in the CABRI network and approved the signing of the hosting agreement by the Ministers of Finance and of International Relations and Cooperation on behalf of South Africa. CABRI is a professional network of senior budget officials from ministries of finance across Africa that seeks to promote efficient and effective management of public finances through the exchange of good practices and experiences among peers.3.1 Change of name of Voortrekker MuseumCabinet noted the name change of the Voortrekker Museum to uMsunduzi Museum. The Voortrekker Museum has completed a process to change its name to uMsunduzi Museum, reflecting the inclusive heritage of Pietermaritzburg. This change also reflects the fact that the museum is no longer a single-theme centre but a multi-themed institution catering for all cultures of KwaZulu-Natal. In keeping with this idea, the name that was chosen refers to the river that runs through the city.4.1 The Tourism Draft Amendment Bill, 2012Cabinet approved the Tourism Draft Amendment Bill, 2012 for submission to Parliament. The Tourism Bill provides for:4.2 Road Accident Fund (Transitional Provisions) Amendment Bill, 2012Cabinet approved the Road Accident Fund (Transitional Provisions) Amendment Bill, 2012 for debate in Parliament. The Road Accident Fund (Transitional Provisions) Bill, 2012 seeks to provide for transitional measures in respect of certain categories of third parties whose claims were limited under the old Act and give effect to the Constitutional Court judgment of Mvumvu vs Minister of Transport. It is clear from the Constitutional Court that:4.3 Private Security Industry Regulation Amendment Bill, 2012Cabinet approved the Private Security Industry Regulation Amendment Bill, 2012 for submission to Parliament. The main objectives of the review of the PSIRA Act is to address gaps that are caused by the lack of effective regulation of the private security industry, in particular the threat to national security posed by the participation of foreigners. The PSIRA Amendment Bill, 2012 seeks to:5.1 Ms Nobayeni Cecilia Dladla was appointed Chief Operating Officer in the national Department of Health.5.2 Ms Modjadji Alidia Seabi was appointed Deputy Director-General: Women Empowerment and Gender Equality in the Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. 5.3Mr Mosa Berry Mabuza was appointed Deputy Director-General: Mineral Policy and Promotion in the Department of Mineral Resources. Cabinet congratulates the new appointees and wishes them well in their new responsibilities. Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)For enquiries, please contact: Jimmy Manyi (Cabinet Spokesperson) Cell: 082 379 3454Issued by: Government Communication (GCIS)