22 June 2012Statement by Home Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma IntroductionThe Governance and Administration cluster aims to create an enabling environment for clean and effective governance that contributes towards economic growth, infrastructure development and a better quality of life for our citizens. Our work is aligned to Outcomes 9 and 12 (a) and (b): A Responsive, Accountable, Effective and Efficient Local Government System; An Efficient, Effective and Development Oriented Public Service; and An Empowered, Fair and Inclusive Citizenship respectively.As part of assessing government s efforts to create a better life for all, Cabinet has approved proposals for a twenty year review which will evaluate progress towards a democratic, non-racial and non-sexist South Africa, socio-economic development, and a review of government programmes. The review will build on existing research, and will be overseen by an Inter-ministerial Committee led by Minister Chabane. An academic reference group will be established to ensure the review is rigorous and is expected to be completed by the end of 2013.Cabinet in November 2011 approved the National Evaluation Policy Framework aimed at developing national and provincial annual and three year evaluation plans, using standardised evaluation guidelines. Cabinet has now approved the first annual National Evaluation Plan under which the following evaluations will be undertaken over the next year:Management Performance Assessment The Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) and the Offices of the Premier were mandated by Cabinet in 2011 to implement annual management performance assessments for all national and provincial departments. In the last year 103 national and provincial departments completed these assessments. Cabinet has further approved amendments to the Performance Management and Development System (PMDS) so that all Heads of Department enter into performance agreements timeously and are assessed every year.Management areas identified for improvement include supply chain management, IT governance, human resource management, and monitoring and evaluation. Pockets of excellence in some management areas have been identified and will be used as best practices case studies which will be shared throughout government.Outcome 9: A Responsive, Accountable, Effective and Efficient Local Government SystemGovernment will accelerate the implementation of the Local Government Turnaround Strategy aimed at responsive, accountable, effective and efficient local government. Five focus areas which will assist in fast tracking implementation have been identified. These are: service delivery, governance, financial management, infrastructure development; and fighting corruption.Working with provinces and municipalities, 108 priority municipalities with the highest backlogs in basic services, financially distressed, highest number of informal settlements and underspending on their infrastructure grants, that will receive targeted focus and support have been identified. Stakeholders outside of government have also been mobilised to support such initiatives.Working together at all levels of government, we have achieved the following: We are further pleased to report that: As part of our contribution to government s overall Infrastructure Development Plan, R47 billion has been budgeted over the next three years towards the development of infrastructure in the twelve major cities to ensure that our people do indeed enjoy a better life. We will also review all pieces of legislation that impede service delivery. In this regard, we have now identified more than three hundred sections of legislations that fall under this category and reviews will be undertaken.Outcome 12(a) An Efficient, Effective and Development Oriented Public ServiceAfrica Public Service DaySouth Africa, comemorates Africa Public Service Day today. This is part of the annual Africa Public Service Day commemorations held annually on 23 June 2012. Public servants come together to celebrate service delivery in communities they serve; celebrate men and women who devote their lives to serving the public; encourage positive interest by citizens in public administration; reward good initiatives; and promote professionalism. The 2012 Africa Public Service Day celebrations coincide with the 15 year implementation of Batho Pele.RecruitmentGovernment is implementing its strategy to improve recruitment and reduce the vacancy rate. Public sector trainingThe transformation of the Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy (PALAMA) into a School of Government remains a key priority. Work was also undertaken in developing a framework that would allow us to continue with stakeholder consultations and engagements in re-positioning PALAMA. In addition, PALAMA remains committed towards building international networks in supporting public service training and development. Agreements with key frontline departments (SAPS, Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities, Social Development, Health, Defence as well as the Auditor-General s office) for the provision of Excellent Customer Service frontline training have been concluded. Administration training was also offered to 4 773 officials at service delivery points. PALAMA has continued to use eLearning as an additional methodology for training delivery. The number of new public servants undergoing the Public Service Induction training has also increased 25167 in 2011/12 compared with 18 660 in 2010/11; unemployed youth graduates 2522 in 2011/12 compared with 1192 in 2010/11. In 2011/12, PALAMA trained a total of 51 760 officials in leadership, management, administration and induction. PALAMA is further responsible for training new public service employees as part of their probation, re-orientation of senior managers and orientation of unemployed youth graduates preparing them for public service employment opportunities.The Legislature Capacity Building Programme has received approval from UNISA for the accreditation of the Certificate in Governance and Leadership. The first group of trainers have completed all requirements and 173 Members of Parliament and Legislatures graduated in November 2011.Corruption Tackled Effectively Training programmes focusing on anti-corruption and ethics management have been introduced and 1018 public service officials, particularly anti-corruption practitioners, were trained. Two sets of guidelines have been drafted as part of implementing the Framework on the Public Sector Integrity Management - on remunerative work outside the Public Service and on the governance of ethics in the public service.Improving ICT standardsThe State Information Technology Agency (SITA), through its e-Government Strategy and implementation plan has achieved a 10% reduction in customer complaints as part of improving stakeholder satisfaction. SITA has further achieved 14% savings on sourcing of ICT goods and services while improving turnaround times for awarding of tenders from 300 days to 132 days and improved contract finalisation turnaround times from 120 days to 43 days.Outcome 12(b) An Empowered, Fair and Inclusive CitizenshipGovernment has been steadily working towards ensuring our people enjoy the benefits of their citizenship and identity while foreign nationals who are resident in our country are also assured of their human rights and dignity. We are also committed to ensuring a new social cohesion amongst all our people.Immigration Policy Review PaperWe are therefore currently finalising our Immigration Policy Review paper. This will conclude the current broad consultation process with key stakeholders before the end of March 2013.Launch of the Smart ID CardWe will within 18 months roll out the new Smart ID Card to the nation. This will go a long way towards securing the integrity of the ID of our citizens. We are currently testing our systems and capability to produce the card through a pilot project which commenced in April 2012. The project is also part of our endeavours aimed at modernising Home Affairs IT systems.Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Conference (CRVS)In September this year, South Africa will, on behalf of both the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and the African Union host the second Ministerial Conference on Civil Registration and Vital Statistics. This will assist Africa to develop national population registers and immigration systems to enhance development while promoting inter and intra African trade.The National Population Registration Campaign (NPR)Since the launch of the National Population Registration Campaign (NPR) in 2010/11, children registered within 30 days have increased from 445 853 to 556 762 in 2011/12, just over 50% of all births. Early registration of child births will ensure that government is able to extend services to children, including social grants, where applicable while helping to prevent fraudulent registration of child births through such schemes as rent a baby .To encourage parents to register their babies within 30 days of delivery, a total of 264 hospitals, clinics and health care facilities have been connected to the Department of Home Affairs. A further 80 hospitals will be connected in the coming year while eighty-eight (88) hospitals and other health care centres are visited regularly by officials for collection of registration forms. We have also witnessed a dramatic decrease in the late registration of persons of 15 years and above, from 354 588 in 2009/10 to 110 902 in the 2011/12 year, thus reducing the risk of fraudulent acquisition of citizenship while the protecting the NPR. A total of 1 199 467 IDs were issued to first time recipients in the 2011/12 financial year. This is a significant increase compared with the 834 353 issued in 2009/10. With the number of applications for the re-issue of IDs and late registration of birth, steadily decreasing, it is evident that South Africans are beginning to value their enabling documents, their identity and their citizenship. In this regard, in the 2011/12 year, we reissued 1 075 994 IDs, which is 5% fewer when compared with the 1 125 141, issued in 2010/11.Social CohesionAs part of commemorating the signing of the Freedom Charter - 57 years ago on 26th June 1955, government will host a Social Cohesion Summit from 4-5 July 2012, at the Walter Sisulu Square of Dedication in Kliptown, Soweto. The theme of the Summit is Working Together to Create a Caring and Proud Society, and will help to prioritize and clearly articulate common goals or a National Vision, for social cohesion. In preparation for the Summit, we have undertaken research and produced a draft discussion document towards the development of a national strategy for building an inclusive and cohesive society.Heritage During this year in which we commemorate the 100th anniversary of the formation of the African National Congress (ANC), we have prioritised the preservation of our country s rich and diverse cultural heritage, with particular emphasis on our liberation heritage. In this regard, we are pleased to report that work is underway at the homestead of former President of the ANC, Oliver Reginald Tambo in Nkantolo, Bizana, where are building a museum, an interpretation centre and a statue. Budgetted at R25 million, the project is expected to create 50 permanent jobs as well as 90 short term jobs. Considerable progress has been made with the Steven Biko Centre in Ginsberg, Eastern Cape. It is anticipated that the center will be opened in either September or October 2012. The Dr John Langalibalele Dube Heritage Legacy project, costing R60 million and expected to create 270 jobs has been launched in Kwa-Zulu Natal.Mzansi Golden EconomyThe Mzansi Golden Economy (MGE) Strategy will support the national target to create 5 million jobs within the next 10 years. This is expected to create more than 150 000 work opportunities over the next five years. Since its launch, we piloted the concept of a sourcing company which has created more than 8 000 direct work opportunities over a two week period, through the procurement of conference bags, performances and other art products.Working together with the Department of Basic Education we have reintroduced art education to schools. We will deploy 3 000 full time art facilitators in schools throughout the country. We have also set aside more than R1.5 million for the Bokgabo Dikolong Visual Arts and Photography competition which will be implemented in all provinces. A further R600 000 has been set aside for the South African School Chorale Eisteddfod involving all provinces.Our goal is that, there must be at least one major signature event per province that we will support on an on-going basis. Through this, we are targeting a baseline of 2000 work opportunities per event. We will therefore provide targeted support to major cultural events such as the Mangaung African Cultural Festival, the North West Calabash in Taung, the Diamonds and Dooring in Kimberly, the Joy of Jazz in Johannesburg, the Cape Town International Jazz Festival and the National Arts Festival in Grahamstown. Progress is also being made towards the establishment of the National Academy for the Cultural and Creative Industries of South Africa.Geographic Names Standardisation We recently held a very successful workshop attended by many stakeholders, which recommended, amongst others, close cooperation amongst the three spheres of government, as we continue to standardise geographic names.LanguagesWe also remain seized with the mandate to promote multilingualism, particularly promoting previously marginalised indigenous languages. The official Languages Bill has been finalised by the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture and will be tabled at the National Assembly. This Bill aims to ensure that the majority of South Africans are able to access public service information in their indigenous languages.Libraries Libraries remain an important tool of educating our youth. A reading nation is an informed nation which will be well equipped to deal with many challenges, and achieve its developmental objectives. We therefore see the community Libraries Programme as an important flagship project through which 15 new libraries will be built and 50 upgraded in the 2012/13 financial year.Olympics and ParalympicsWith the opening of 2012 London Olympics just over a month away, we are now focusing on the preparation of Team South Africa. We do so conscious and hopeful that those who still have to qualify will do so soon and also be ready to go and represent us with pride in London. Various government departments are working together towards supporting the multi-coded Team South Africa that will leave our shores to raise our flag at the 2012 London Olympics and Paralympics. Government launched the Magnificent Fridays campaign on 8 June in Bellville, Western Cape, to kick-start a movement to support Team South Africa and the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics. The campaign will also be rolled out in other provinces.Transformation of sportAs part of consolidating social cohesion, we have observed visible improvement in school sport and transformation. In this regard, the Eminent Persons Group on Transformation in South Africa, met for the first time on 8 June 2012. Their work is expected to assist government conceptualise and implement carefully considered solutions and policies designed to ensure transformation in sports. A transformed sport and recreation sector will open opportunities for our youth, to participate actively in sport and recreation. It will also lead towards better representative and performing national teams.School SportThe School Sport leagues programme is gaining momentum. The 11 000 schools registered for participation is expected to increase next year aimed at bringing together the youth of South Africa across the colour line. We ultimately aim to increase the athlete base in the country, improving the talent pool and South Africa s overall international performance.Municipal Sport &amp; Recreation ConferenceThe historic Municipal Sport &amp; Recreation Conference was held from 28-29 May 2012, to engage municipalities towards improvement of sport throughout the country. We are pleased with the outcomes of the Conference during which it was agreed that municipalities are willing to improve on access to sport facilities and structure their by-laws to support sport development.The Ministerial Advisory Committee on RecreationThe Ministry of Sport &amp; Recreation has recently announced the appointment of the Ministerial Advisory Committee on Recreation to among other things, research on the best practice in recreation delivery, norms and standards on the delivery and maintenance of recreational facilities as well as advising the Ministry on best way to manage both sport and recreation. The Advisory Committee members are Professor A. Goslin; Mr M. Mthembu; Ms D. Moodley; Mr WM Chuene; Mr S. Gwala; Ms CN Tshaka; Mr M. Mamabolo; Professor M. Keim Lees; Mr M. Lindie; and Mr Robert Marawa.Issued by: Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)