1.1 Employment Equity Targets for Disability, Gender and Race Representation in the Public Service Cabinet noted the report by the Department of Public Service and Administration on trends, progress made and the challenge experienced in meeting equity targets adopted for representation of women in Senior Management Service (SMS) level and people with disabilities in the Public Service as part of government s transformation programme. Progress towards achieving gender and disability representivity has been slow. Reports indicate that the racial representation target of 75% has been achieved but the 50% target for women at SMS levels and 2% representation of people with disabilities has not been achieved. Representation of women at SMS level was 38.1% and for people with disabilities 0.36 % in March 2012. While the process of putting in place interventions to achieve these targets, the current equity target of 50% women at SMS level and 2% employment of people with disabilities in the Public Service will be retained. 1.2 Presidential Hotline Performance Cabinet noted the progress made by the Presidential Hotline with regard to case resolution per province and national departments and requested provinces and national departments to urgently lower their case resolution rates. Between 31 January 2012 and 30 September 2012, overall case resolution performance has improved by 7.11% (from 79.89% to 87.01%). The Minister in the Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation will develop a mechanism to facilitate the submission of proposals received through the Presidential Hotline amongst others and approved that management structures of departments monitor not only the number of cases resolved but also the quality of case resolution. 1.3 Open Government Partnership (OGP) Cabinet noted the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Declaration, the country action plan and progress on the OGP commitments. The OGP, of which South Africa is a member, is a multi-stakeholder coalition of leading governments and civil society organisations working to advance transparency and accountability in government with the goals of increasing responsiveness to citizens, countering corruption, promoting economic efficiencies, harnessing innovation and improving the delivery of services. At the launch of the OGP last year, President Jacob Zuma reiterated South Africa s commitment to the principles of open governance. South Africa made significant inputs to the final OGP Declaration and Articles of Governance. An OGP country action plan has been drafted through a consultative process with civil society. The Minister of Public Service and Administration will be embarking on a roadshow to communicate the OGP commitments. 1.4 White Paper on South Africa s Foreign Policy Cabinet approved the amended White Paper on South Africa s Foreign Policy for submission to Parliament. The Draft White Paper uses the framework of the Diplomacy of Ubuntu to explain how South Africa s foreign policy is shaped by collaboration, cooperation and partnership over conflict. It further reflects on the inter-relationship between National Interests and Values and reaffirms the pillars of South Africa s foreign policy are Africa, South-South cooperation, multilateralism, economic diplomacy as well as building partnerships with the North. Special emphasis is given to focal areas such as Africa, multilateralism and economic diplomacy and it discusses broadly the cooperation focus for geographic regions. 1.5 Creating training and education opportunities within the Public Service Cabinet noted the relicensing of the Public Service Sector Education and Training Authority (PSETA) for a further 4 years and approved the increase in the administrative and other contributions for training and education of employees of all national and provincial departments from the current 10% of the 1% of payroll, to 30% of the 1% of payroll to the PSETA and line function Sector Education and Training Authorities. Cabinet also noted the process to be followed to creating training spaces for internships, learnerships and artisans by the PSETA. 1.6 Establishment of new universities in the Mpumalanga and Northern Cape Provinces Cabinet noted the progress made in the planning and development of two new universities in Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape including consultation with the public and affected stakeholders. Cabinet further noted the intention to promulgate the establishment of the two universities by January 2013, which requires publication of the address and therefore that the state-owned land identified for each university has to be committed for the establishment of the universities. The establishment of the new universities is aligned with government policy to expand access to higher education for the growing number of qualifying school-leavers. 1.7 Final report on the Intra-Departmental Task Team on Iron Ore and Steel (IDTT) In keeping with its prior decisions to secure a developmental Iron Ore and enhance the competitiveness of the steel value chain, Cabinet endorsed the final report on the work of the IDTT and the recommendations contained in the report for urgent implementation.The recommendations include: 1.8 The South African Mint Company s commemorative coin design 2013 Cabinet approved the South African Mint Company s 2013 Numismatic commemorative coins namely: 2013 Natura series 24 ct gold coins 2013 50c, 20c, 10c and 5c sterling silver commemorative coins 2013 R2 Crown size and 2 c (Tickey) silver coins. These coins series are thoughtfully chosen to reflect South Africa s heritage, its fauna and flora and its social achievements. 1.9 Report on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) Cabinet approved the report on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) for submission to Parliament and that it be released for public comment. 1.10 Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project Cabinet noted that the public consultation process outlined in the government gazette on the Gauteng Freeway Improvement Project has ended and calls on all government institutions to register all their vehicles for e-tollling.2.1 The Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Draft Amendment Bill, 2012 Cabinet approved that the Draft Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill 2012 be submitted to Parliament. The Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act gives effect to Section 24 of the Constitution by ensuring that the nation s minerals are developed in an orderly manner while promoting justifiable social and economic development. The draft amendment Bill seeks to address the following: Define certain concepts that were not defined and refine existing definitions; Make provision for rights to fall within the insolvent estate in the event that a company becomes liquidated; Strengthen the provisions relating to cession, transfer and encumbrance of rights in order to permit the partitioning of rights; Regulate the exploitation of associated minerals; Address shortcomings identified whilst simultaneously streamlining the administrative processes in relation to the regulation of the mining environment management function; Make provision for the implementation of the approved beneficiation strategy through which strategic minerals can be processed locally for a higher value; Align the MPRDA with the Geoscience Amendment Act, 2010 (Act No. 16 of 2010 The amendments will further address loopholes identified in various court judgments. 2.2 Infrastructure Development Bill Cabinet noted the Infrastructure Development Bill and approved the gazetting of the Bill for public comments. The Bill seeks to provide for amongst others things: The continued existence of the Presidential Infrastructure Coordinating Commission; The designation and implementation of strategic integrated projects which are of significant economic or social importance to the State or a region; That public-private partnership may be employed as a vehicle to bring about rapid infrastructure development where an organ of state including a public entity is unable to implement a project; That all stakeholders involved in the implementation of a project will comprise a steering committee to implement the project; and For processes and periods of time applicable to the implementation of strategic integrated projects. 3. CURRENT AFFAIRS 3.1 Cabinet noted and welcomed the first phase of the rolling stock fleet renewal programme by the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA). The capitalisation and refurbishment was necessitated by the need to upgrade the ageing fleet, combined with rapidly growing passenger needs. This has led a to focus on up-scaling the rolling stock investment as part of a broader strategy to acquire modern technology to meet changing demands. This renewal programme is part of government s infrastructure development and job creation programmes. 3.2 Cabinet noted that South Africa was elected to chair the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KP) in 2013 taking over from United States of America. South Africa s chairmanship coincides with the KP s 10th year anniversary, where it all began in Kimberley. The hosting by South Africa of the meetings in June and November 2013 will strengthen international relations, brand South Africa as a business destination of choice and elevate South Africa s stature as a global player in the diamond industry. The appointment of Ambassador Welile Nhlapo as the KP Chair was a Ministerial decision taken in consultation with the Department of International Relations and Cooperation. 3.3 Cabinet congratulated the Department of Education, principals, teachers, parents, guardians and learners for their dedication and commitment in the matric examination process. Cabinet also noted that the Department of Basic Education will announce the matric results on 2 January 2013, with individual results available on 3 January 2013. 3.4 Cabinet noted the recent Annual National Assessment (ANA) results. The 2012 ANA revealed an improvement in the Grade 3 and 6 learner performance with regard to literacy and numeracy. Cabinet reminded South Africans that the report is achieving its intended purpose to track progress of learning outcomes in order to improve the quality of education in the long term. 3.5 Cabinet joined the Minister of Finance in thanking South Africans for their outstanding co-operation with the South African Revenue Service (SARS), which was demonstrated by increased levels of tax compliance and the improved timeliness along which taxpayers have submitted their returns. 3.6 Cabinet congratulated the leaders of the Great Lakes region for negotiating the withdrawal of rebel forces from the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. While the situation remains fragile, the withdrawal is a positive development for stability to return to the region. 3.7 Cabinet congratulates the Proteas squad for their world class performance against Australia in Perth. South Africa retained first position in the Test Match rankings. This win augments Cricket South Africa s milestone, for their 200th Test match since unity. 3.8 Cabinet applauded the Lancet country report s praise for South Africa in recent successes regarding reduction in infection rates, effective treatment and dealing with the stigma. 3.9 Cabinet commended the Department of Health for achieving outstanding results in increasing life expectancy in South Africa by five years as a result of a shift in health policy with regard to antiretroviral medication. 3.10 Cabinet welcomed South Africa s election in November 2012 to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC). South Africa was voted by 183 out of 192 countries. ECOSOC is one of the Principal Organs of the United Nations alongside the Security Council and General Assembly. The Membership of ECOSOC will provide South Africa an opportunity to contribute to the strengthening and reform of the Organ. As a member of ECOSOC, South Africa will be located at the centre of the debate on the Global Development Agenda including the acceleration of the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals. 3.11 Cabinet expressed concern with regard to the situation in Mali and called for a return to constitutional normalcy. Cabinet agrees with the African Union that Mali is faced with overlapping crises, characterised by the occupation of northern Mali by armed groups and the institutional crisis that arose as a result of the coup d tat of March 2012. 3.12 Cabinet expressed sadness at the untimely passing of South Africa s first democratic Cabinet Secretary, Professor Jakes Gerwel. Cabinet also expressed sadness at the passing of democratic South Africa s first President of the Constitutional Court, Arthur Chaskalson. Cabinet also expressed condolences to families and friends of the late Free State Health MEC, Fundiswa Ngubentombi and her security, Sergeant Motaung. Both died in a car accident. Cabinet approved the following appointment: 4.1 The extension of employment contract of Mr Mashwahle Joseph Diphofa, Director-General at the Department of Public Service and Administration for a period of three years. 4.2 Mr Dlabantu Mziwonke Director-General at the Department of Public Works. 4.3 Ms Sindisiwe Jane Ngxongo, Chief Operations Officer, Department of Human Settlements. 4.4 Mr Stephen Hanival as Chief Economist at the Department of Trade and Industry. 4.5 Ms M Newton as Deputy Director-General: Arts and Culture Promotion and Development at the Department of Arts and Culture. 4.6 Mr Gerald Vusithemba Ndima Deputy Director-General: Heritage Promotion and Preservation at the Department of Arts and Culture. 4.7 Ms Kgomotso Martha Modise Deputy Director-General: Transport at the Department of Public Enterprises for a fixed term of five years 4.8 Ms Jeanette Rebecca Hunter, Deputy Director-General: Primary Health Care Services at the National Department of Health. 4.9 Mr Shabeer Khan Chief Financial Officer at the Department of Trade and Industry. 4.10 Cabinet approved the appointment of Mr P Khoza as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Alexkor and as ex-officio member of the Alexkor Board of Directors on a five year fixed term contract. 4.11 Cabinet approved the appointment of Mr Sizwe Welcome Mncwango as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) (SOC) Ltd. 4.12 Dr John Lamola, Mr Jabu Luthuli, Advocate Kenosi Moroka and Ms Chwayita Mabude were appointed Non-Executive Directors to the Airports Company South Africa (ACSA) Board for a period of three years. 4.13 Ms Kenosi Pearl Selane and Ms Mary-Anne Phuti Matlala were appointed as Non-Executive Members to the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) Board for a period of sixteen months. 4.14 The following were appointed Directors to the National Nuclear Regulator (NNR) Board for a period of three years: Dr Tracy Cohen, Prof Gordon Sibiya, Mr Tshepo Mofokeng, Mr Samuel Kakoma, Mr Sibusiso Mimi, Mr Jeffrey Leaver, Mr Wilson Lesufi, Dr Thapelo Motshudi, Mr Ishaam Abader, Mr KatseMaphoto, Ms Elsie Monale (alternative to Mr Maphoto) and Ms Nolwazi Cobbinah (alternative to Mr Abader) 4.15 Ms Mondo Mazwai, Mr Anton Roskam and Professor Imraan Valodia were appointed as part-time members of the Competition Tribunal for a period of five years. 4.16 Mr Charl Higgo Du Toit and Ms Bulelwa Njenje were reappointed as Non-Executive Directors to the South African Special Risk Insurance Association (SASRIA) Limited Board for a period of three years. Ms Maki Ndlovu was appointed to the SASRIA Limited Board for a period of three years. 4.17 Ms Moira Anne Moses was reappointed to the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) Board for a further period of three years and Mr Ignatius Simon Sehoole and Mr Jan Strydom reappointed for a period of one year. Ms Matshepo Faith More, Ms Rejane Woodroffe and Mr Vuyo Jack were appointed to the PIC Board for a period of three years. Enquiries: Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson) Contact: 0835010139Issued by Government Communications (GCIS) 