26 October 2012Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 24 October 2012. 1.1 Eighth Session of the Republic of South Africa - Democratic Republic of Congo Bi-National Commission (BNC), held in Pretoria Cabinet noted that at the invitation of President Jacob Zuma, His Excellency, Mr Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Democratic Republic of Congo, visited South Africa from 22 to 24 October 2012 on the occasion of the Eighth Session of the Bi-National Commission between South Africa and the DRC. During their official talks, the two Presidents reviewed a wide range of bilateral, regional and international issues. They expressed great satisfaction at the warm and special relations that exist between their two countries and committed themselves to further enhance these relations for the mutual benefit of their respective countries and peoples. 1.2 Public Protests and Politically Motivated Killings Cabinet condemns the alleged politically motivated killings in KwaZulu-Natal and calls on all South Africans to demonstrate political tolerance and act responsibly. Political differences are no cause for violence. Cabinet also calls on communities to participate actively in Community Policing Forums and Community Safety Forums and partner with the SA Police Service in contributing towards better functioning communities as well as ensuring that South Africans are and feel safe. 1.3 Education Cabinet joins the nation in wishing the Class of 2012 well in their National Senior Certificate examinations, especially since this is the first critical mass of matriculants born in a democratic South Africa. The success of the interventionist catch-up programme to assist pupils writing the senior certificate examination in Northern Cape has also sparked renewed hope and optimism. On this note, Cabinet calls on all South Africans to continue providing full support to pupils across the country, including those in correctional facilities, as they write their exams. Whilst Cabinet wishes all matriculants well in their exams, Cabinet commended Remember Mashabela of GaSelale, Burgersfort who wrote the first paper of the matric exams in hospital. 1.4 Disaster Management The recent spate of floods across the country has resulted in loss of life, damaged homes and public infrastructure. Cabinet express condolences and sympathy to those who have lost loved ones and those impacted on by the damage to property. 1.5 Congratulatory Note Cabinet congratulates Minister Trevor Manuel on his appointment to head up a panel set up by the World Bank to review its Doing Business project. His appointment confirms, once again, the confidence that world institutions and the international community in general have in South Africa and its people. 1.6 Condolences Cabinet expresses its deepest sympathies and conveys its condolences to the families and friends of Bafana Bafana assistant coach Thomas Madigage, as well as the families and friends of acclaimed photographer Alfred Khumalo, who covered the 1976 student uprising, the State of Emergency during the 1980s, the unbanning of the liberation movements and the inauguration of South Africa's first democratic government among a host of other events.2.1 Package of issues to Respond to the economic challenges Cabinet welcomed the key elements of the package agreed with the NEDLAC constituencies to respond to the economic challenges facing the country. The package aims to instill confidence in the economy and to indicate to the nation that social-partners will, on their own and together, act decisively to promote inclusive growth, job creation and social stability. The package also seeks to normalise the industrial relations environment, end violence, support law and order and bring about greater equality. To demonstrate the National Executive's commitment to diminishing salary inequalities, Cabinet endorsed that salary increases of the National Executive be frozen for the next 12 months. Cabinet also agreed that other measures that have financial implications for the administration will be effected through the normal Budget processes. Cabinet calls on all the parties and South Africans at large to embrace all elements of the package material and symbolic and to assess what it is all of us could do to help ease the current situation. 2.2 Report on the implementation of the Section 100 (1) (B) interventions Cabinet noted progress made on the implementation of Section 100 (b) intervention in the Eastern Cape and Limpopo provincial education departments. The Cabinet s intervention in this regard is beginning to yield positive results especially in the provision of systemic solutions to: Cabinet also noted progress made in terms of the Department s Catch Up Plan in the Eastern Cape, Limpopo and Northern Cape which includes; newspaper supplements for students; community radio stations receiving transmissions from Mindset studios in Randburg and Study guides for Spring Schools also available on websites. 2.3 Ratification of the Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No.81) Cabinet approved the submission of the Labour Inspection Convention of 1947 No 81 to Parliament for ratification. This convention will provide useful guidance for designing and monitoring of an efficient labour inspection systems. Labour inspection is a key pillar of the labour administration system, ensuring the supervision and implementation of labour legislation and policies in the workplace. 2.4 Executive protocol for the recruitment and filling of advertised posts of Heads of Department (HODs) Cabinet approved the Executive Protocol: Principles and Procedures for the Employment of Deputy Directors-General (DDGs) and HODs nationally. The Executive Protocol will ensure that the employment of HODs and DDGs are aligned to the basic values and principles enshrined in section 195 of the Constitution, in particular that of ensuring employment practices are based on ability, objectivity and fairness. 2.5 South Africa s position paper for the 24th Meeting of Parties to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the Ozone LayerCabinet noted South Africa s position for the 24th Meeting of Parties (MOP24) to Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) and supports the amendment to the Montreal Protocol on condition that:The meeting will be held from 12 to 16 November 2012 in Geneva, Switzerland. 2.6 Preparation for the BRICS Summit Cabinet received progress report from the Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) on the preparations for the imminent 5th Brazil, Russian federation, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) on the preparations for the BRICS Summit to be hosted in South Africa in March 2013. The IMC presented the four key summit outcomes and deliverables envisaged. They are the launch of the new Development Bank; BRICS leaders- Africa Dialogue Forum; launch of the BRICS Business Council and the BRICA Think Tank. 2.7 First International Conference of the African Society for Laboratory Medicine Cabinet approved the hosting of the 1st International Conference of the African Society for Laboratory Medicine, to be held in Cape Town from 1 to 7 December 2012. South Africa was chosen as the host country for this historic conference in view of its advanced laboratory systems and resources which could be engaged to make this conference a technical success. The objective of the conference is to convene healthcare professionals and policy makers from Africa and around the world to present and discuss the latest developments in diagnostics, strategies for strengthening national laboratory systems and networks and their impact on healthcare delivery as well as disease surveillance. 2.8 International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) 60th Anniversary Conference Cabinet noted that South Africa will participate in the IPPF which will be held at the Pan African Parliament in South Africa from 28 to 29 November 2012. President Jacob Zuma has been invited to host the ceremony on 29 November 2012. This conference aims to celebrate the achievements of the IPPF and its Member Associations and set out a new agenda for the sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR) for the Post International Conference on Population Development (ICDP) era. This conference will contribute to mass mobilisation for better reproductive health in South Africa thus creating a better South Africa and a better and safer Africa. 2.9 Overview of the Child Support Grant (CSG) beneficiaries and the economic situation of their caregivers Cabinet noted a presentation on the overview of children receiving the Child Support Grant including the employment and economic status of their caregivers. Cabinet also noted the findings of the Child Support Grant (CSG) Impact Evaluation Study and supported the CSG as one of Government s successful developmental programmes. Cabinet approved that an Inter-Ministerial Committee constituting the Ministers of Social Development, Home Affairs, Health and Basic Education develop a proposal for the efficient registration of children. 2.10 Outcome of the South African Early Childhood Development (ECD) Conference Cabinet noted the outcome of the South African Early Childhood Development (ECD) Conference held in East London from 27 to 30 March 2012. Cabinet also noted the National Action Plan as work in progress. Cabinet approved that the Ministers of Social Development and of Basic Education further consult on the possible recruitment of retired ECD experts and/or academics to assist at existing ECD centres while a standardised curriculum is being developed for ECD practitioners. 2.11 The African Charter on Values and Principles of Public Service and Administration. Cabinet approved the submission of the African Charter on Values and Principles of Public Service and Administration to Parliament for ratification. The purpose of the Charter is to define the principles and general rules governing the transformation of African public service administration. The Charter also serves as a policy framework for Africa s public service administrations and source of inspiration for developing, strengthening or updating national codes of conduct with respect to transparency, professionalism and ethical standards.3.1Human Rights Commission Bill Cabinet approved the South African Human Rights Commission Bill, 2012 for submission to Parliament. Since the commencement of the Human Rights Commission Act, 1994 and the establishment of the Human Rights Commission, numerous amendments to the Act, dealing with a variety of matters, were proposed. The South African Human Rights Commission Bill seeks to give effect to those proposals by repealing the Act and replacing it with a new South African Human Rights Commission Act.4.1 Mr Mmboneni Muofhe was appointed Deputy Director-General: International Cooperation and Resources in the Department of Science and Technology. 4.2 Cabinet approved the appointment of the following as members of the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (NECSA) Board: Adv Medi Moira Mokuena, Dr Nazreen Shaik-Peremanov, Mr Mogwera Khoathane, Prof Thokozani Majozi, Mr Zizamele Smodeni Mbambo, Mr Phumlani Zwelithini Raphael Zwane and Ms Elsie Monale as the alternate member. 4.3 The following were appointed as members of the PETROSA Board: Adv Brenda Madumise, Mr George Smith, Mr Athol Graham Rhoda and Mr S Mokoena. 4.4 Cabinet approved the appointment of Ms Nomavuso Mnxasana as a new Non-Executive Director of the Transnet Board for a term of three years and noted the appointment of Mr Anoj Singh, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the Transnet Board, as an Executive Director of the Board. Cabinet congratulates the appointees and wishes them well in their new responsibilities. Enquiries: Phumla Williams (Acting Cabinet Spokesperson) Cell: 083 5010 139 Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)